feat (docs): add LangSmith observability page (#3983)
vercel/ai: content/providers/05-observability/langsmith.mdx

---
title: LangSmith

> description: Monitor, evaluate and your AI SDK application with LangSmith

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: Monitor and evaluate your AI SDK application with LangSmith
```

---

# LangSmith Observability

[LangSmith](https://docs.smith.langchain.com) is a platform for building production-grade LLM applications.
It allows you to closely monitor and evaluate your application, so you can ship quickly and with confidence.

> Use of LangChain's open source frameworks is not necessary, and LangSmith integrates with the [Vercel AI SDK](/docs/introduction) via the `AISDKExporter` OpenTelemetry trace exporter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use of LangChain's open-source frameworks is not necessary, and LangSmith integrates with the [AI SDK](/docs/introduction) via the `AISDKExporter` OpenTelemetry trace exporter.
```

> This guide will walk through an example.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

<Note>
  A version of this guide is also available in the [LangSmith
  documentation](https://docs.smith.langchain.com/observability/how_to_guides/tracing/trace_with_vercel_ai_sdk).
</Note>

## Setup

> Install an AI SDK model provider and the [LangSmith client SDK](https://npmjs.com/package/langsmith).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Install an [AI SDK model provider](/docs/providers) and the [LangSmith client SDK](https://npmjs.com/package/langsmith).
```

> The code snippets below will use Vercel's OpenAI integration, but you can use any [other supported provider](/docs/foundations/providers-and-models) as well.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The code snippets below will use the [AI SDK's OpenAI provider](/providers/ai-sdk-providers/openai), but you can use any [other supported provider](/providers/ai-sdk-providers/) as well.
```

<Tabs items={['pnpm', 'npm', 'yarn']}>
  <Tab>
    <Snippet text="pnpm add @ai-sdk/openai langsmith" dark />
  </Tab>
  <Tab>
    <Snippet text="npm install @ai-sdk/openai langsmith" dark />
  </Tab>
  <Tab>
    <Snippet text="yarn add @ai-sdk/openai langsmith" dark />
  </Tab>
</Tabs>

<Note>
  The `AISDKExporter` class is only available in `langsmith` SDK version
  `>=0.2.1`.
</Note>

Next, set required environment variables.

```bash
export LANGCHAIN_TRACING_V2=true
export LANGCHAIN_API_KEY=<your-api-key>

> export OPENAI_API_KEY=<your-openai-api-key> # The examples use the OpenAI API (not necessary in general)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
export OPENAI_API_KEY=<your-openai-api-key> # The examples use OpenAI (replace with your provider)
```

```

You can also [see this guide](https://docs.smith.langchain.com/observability/how_to_guides/tracing/trace_without_env_vars) for other ways to configure LangSmith,
or [the section below](#custom-langsmith-client) for how to pass in a custom LangSmith client instance.

## Trace Logging

### Next.js

> First, create a `instrumentation.js` file in your project root.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, create an `instrumentation.js` file in your project root.
```

```ts
import { registerOTel } from '@vercel/otel';
import { AISDKExporter } from 'langsmith/vercel';

export function register() {
  registerOTel({
    serviceName: 'langsmith-vercel-ai-sdk-example',
    traceExporter: new AISDKExporter(),
  });
}
```

> You can learn more how to setup OpenTelemetry instrumentation within your Next.js app [here](https://nextjs.org/docs/app/api-reference/file-conventions/instrumentation).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can learn more how to [setup OpenTelemetry instrumentation within your Next.js app here](https://nextjs.org/docs/app/api-reference/file-conventions/instrumentation).
```

Afterwards, add the `experimental_telemetry` argument to your AI SDK calls that you want to trace. For convenience, we've included the `AISDKExporter.getSettings()` method which appends additional metadata for LangSmith.

> ```ts

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```ts highlight="8"
```

import { AISDKExporter } from 'langsmith/vercel';
import { streamText } from 'ai';
import { openai } from '@ai-sdk/openai';

await streamText({
  model: openai('gpt-4o-mini'),
  prompt: 'Write a vegetarian lasagna recipe for 4 people.',
  experimental_telemetry: AISDKExporter.getSettings(),
});
```

You should see a trace in your LangSmith dashboard [like this one](https://smith.langchain.com/public/a9d9521a-4f97-4843-b1e2-b87c3a125503/r).

> You can also trace runs with tool calls:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also trace tool calls:
```

      description: 'list all orders',
      parameters: z.object({ userId: z.string() }),
      execute: async ({ userId }) =>
        `User ${userId} has the following orders: 1`,
    }),
    viewTrackingInformation: tool({
      description: 'view tracking information for a specific order',
      parameters: z.object({ orderId: z.string() }),
      execute: async ({ orderId }) =>
        `Here is the tracking information for ${orderId}`,
    }),
  },
  experimental_telemetry: AISDKExporter.getSettings(),
  maxSteps: 10,
});
```

Which results in a trace like [this one](https://smith.langchain.com/public/4d3add36-756d-4c8c-845d-4ad701a315bb/r).

### Node.js

Add the `AISDKExporter` to the trace exporter to your OpenTelemetry setup.

```ts
import { AISDKExporter } from 'langsmith/vercel';

import { NodeSDK } from '@opentelemetry/sdk-node';
import { getNodeAutoInstrumentations } from '@opentelemetry/auto-instrumentations-node';

const sdk = new NodeSDK({
  traceExporter: new AISDKExporter(),
  instrumentations: [getNodeAutoInstrumentations()],
});

sdk.start();
```

Afterwards, add the `experimental_telemetry` argument to your AI SDK calls that you want to trace.

> :::info

Reviewer: reaplce with note component <Note>{content}</Note>

  model: openai('gpt-4o-mini'),
  prompt: 'Write a vegetarian lasagna recipe for 4 people.',
  experimental_telemetry: AISDKExporter.getSettings(),
});
```

### Debugging Exporter

You can enable debug logs for the `AISDKExporter` by passing the `debug` argument to the constructor.

```ts
const traceExporter = new AISDKExporter({ debug: true });
```

Alternatively, you can set the `OTEL_LOG_LEVEL=DEBUG` environment variable to enable debug logs for the exporter as well as the rest of the OpenTelemetry stack.

### Adding metadata

You can add metadata to your traces to help organize and filter them in the LangSmith UI:

```ts
import { AISDKExporter } from 'langsmith/vercel';
import { generateText } from 'ai';
import { openai } from '@ai-sdk/openai';

await generateText({
  model: openai('gpt-4o-mini'),
  prompt: 'Write a vegetarian lasagna recipe for 4 people.',
  experimental_telemetry: AISDKExporter.getSettings({
    metadata: { userId: '123', language: 'english' },
  }),
});
```

Metadata will be visible in your LangSmith dashboard and can be used to filter and search for specific traces.

## Further reading

- [LangSmith docs](https://docs.smith.langchain.com)

> - [LangSmith guide on tracing with the Vercel AI SDK](https://docs.smith.langchain.com/observability/how_to_guides/tracing/trace_with_vercel_ai_sdk)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [LangSmith guide on tracing with the AI SDK](https://docs.smith.langchain.com/observability/how_to_guides/tracing/trace_with_vercel_ai_sdk)
```

- [LangSmith guide on tracing without environment variables](https://docs.smith.langchain.com/observability/how_to_guides/tracing/trace_without_env_vars)

> And once you've set up LangSmith tracing for your project, try gathering a dataset and evaluating it:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once you've set up LangSmith tracing for your project, try gathering a dataset and evaluating it:
```
